title: "continuing"

subtitle: to those waitlisted, not admitted, and still waiting

These blogs exist for many reasons. Show prospective students what MIT is like, the good *and* the bad. Give comfort and advice about your applications. Occasionally, to give insight into the admissions review process. And to connect our lives to the life of you, the reader.

The reality of admissions to selective universities means that the end result will leave many people disappointed. MIT released its undergraduate admissions decisions two days ago, and the reality is we as bloggers cannot connect with the decision that you may have received on Sunday. We all say that it will get better, that you will continue to grow and become yourself, that this is not the end of a road, but the start of a new journey.

I know that those words are hard to hear, especially when we seem to be saying that from a position of having been admitted, of being at MIT. (Though, to be clear, [it’s](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/guest-post-hindsight-in-2020/) [not](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/denied-by-mit-5-years-later/) [just](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/denied-by-mit-now-a-goldwater-scholar/) [us](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/denied-by-mit-now-a-phd-student-at-the-media-lab/) [who](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/having-survived-rejection-guest-post/) say those words.) I know that many of you might still be hurt to be told “no”, wishing that something had gone differently, sad that you’re on the waitlist and have a few more months of waiting to go, or feel like a dream you wanted is now impossible. **You are incredibly, incredibly valid for feeling all of those things. No matter what. But please, please remember that your worth as a human being is in no way dictated by how college applications turn out.**

There’s a lot of things that you might be feeling. And I can’t *begin* to know exactly what those feelings are. But what I *can* do is share my own experiences with rejection, waitlists, and more, as a part of [annotation note a process that is still ongoing, and won’t be over until april 15] my own process of [applying to grad school](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/17707-words/), where to be honest with you, things haven’t been all sunshine and roses. Maybe some of my feelings will resonate with you. Maybe they won’t. But maybe this post will be a way for you to start processing all of those thoughts, a way to start moving forward from a Pi Day that might not have gone the way you wanted.

---

My first graduate school application came back on my birthday. It was a rejection. I’ve got to say, that wasn’t exactly the best birthday gift that I ever received. 

With each rejection that I received, my first question was always “why”. But that’s [already been talked about on the blogs](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/why/).

My second question was “what if”. What if I knew what I wanted to do earlier in college? What if I had taken those harder math classes? What if I had done more research opportunities, published more (or higher quality) papers? What if I was that alternate-universe-Paolo who had the choice between [redacted] and [redacted], and wasn’t just stuck in this limbo of not knowing?

As human beings, we are *constantly* focusing not just on what is, but what can be. In many ways, this is good: it lets us dream, it lets us grow, it lets us hope. But the focus on what could be always getting me. Imagining pasts that never were, futures that now cannot be. And while sometimes we try to [trim the tree of possible paths ourselves](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/trying-to-trim-the-tree-of-possible-paths/), [sometimes we reach and find those doors shut](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/my-rejection-resume/). But no matter what, [you end up as a future you that *is* yourself](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/choosing-to-become-yourself/).

And while all of that may be true and all, that doesn’t stop the wondering in the moment of what can be. I’ve found myself unable to sleep until 3 AM many times this semester, wondering about how alternate-universe-Paolo is doing with his graduate apps, if he has the choices that I desperately want.

But the person that I am in this universe is a function of how past-me decided to act, a function of [my choices](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/decisions-decisions-2/) and [values](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/on-success-meaning-and-time/). We always judge harsher in hindsight, just because it’s easier to; we know how the future progressed, [what was beyond the river bend](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uZrg3hhntQY), and we can see the turns that we should have taken to make present-us the way that we want now. I know that past-me made the best decisions that he could have made given what he knew at the time. I can’t fault past-me for those decisions, because they were made with good intent. Besides, those decisions have led me to where I am now. 

I know that I should be happy enough with that, I tell myself. But sometimes, I still wonder.

---

> [annotation shoutout Асылбек Умурзак on Sunday’s thread who reminded me of this quote] “To love at all is to be vulnerable. Love anything and your heart will be wrung and possibly broken. If you want to make sure of keeping it intact you must give it to no one, not even an animal. Wrap it carefully round with hobbies and little luxuries; avoid all entanglements. Lock it up safe in the casket or coffin of your selfishness. But in that casket, safe, dark, motionless, airless, it will change. It will not be broken; it will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. To love is to be vulnerable.”
>
> ― C.S. Lewis, The Four Loves

The nature of applications, of course, means that there is always the possibility of being denied. Nothing is ever guaranteed in life, least of all admission to selective programs. But when I apply to things, no matter how selective, no matter what I tell myself, there’s always the small, small part of me that wishes that things turn out good. *Hoping* for the chance for dreams to be a reality. Sometimes, those dreams work out. But sometimes, they don’t.

I am a very risk-averse person. My utility function is decidedly concave. Don’t try to beat the stock market, don’t really gamble (despite liking poker and being from Nevada), don’t like taking chances that I don’t need to. But sometimes, there is no way forward but to try, to take the risk of what cards you’ll be dealt, and to carry on from there. And that is the way that decisions work: the only way that you have a chance to be admitted is to permit the chance to be rejected.

And when that chance exists, especially when there’s a place that you really, really want to go, it hurts when that place told you no. Personally, I didn’t let myself fall in love with MIT when I was applying, partly because I didn’t want it to hurt so bad if I got rejected. But if that was you, dreaming of the idea of coming to MIT, only to have it not come to fruition this past Sunday, well, you are much, much braver than I was. *To love is to be vulnerable*.

Do not regret that vulnerability, because to have loved something is to have lived. If we led our lives not loving things, not *wishing* for something to happen, well, we’d go on our days without really caring about anything. Do not regret trying, because future you will have always wondered how it had turned out. Be proud of those essays, of the person that you have become, the person who went and wrote an application and showed themselves, all of your victories and your shortcomings, to an admissions committee. The person who *allowed* themselves to be judged; of course, while admissions is not a judge of your self-worth, it does sometimes feel like that; and even so, we took that risk.

For me? Looking at my applications to graduate schools, sometimes I do still read it and wish that the person applying had been ever-more-competitive, ever-more-qualified. But sometimes, I read it and think about how high school freshman Paolo, still trying to figure out his place in the world, never could have imagined that in seven years he’d feel competent and qualified enough to even apply. And if schools tell me no, or that I should hold on a bit while they figure out many more students they can admit? Well, there is no one path in life; there is the hope that things will work out, that I’ll get off waitlists, and if none of that works out, I can end up working or researching for a while longer while I figure out what that next path will be. 

---

The title of this post, *continuing*, derives from Latin; *con-* meaning “together” or “with”, and *tenere*, meaning “to hold” (the same root as “maintain” or “tender” or “tenet”). In response to “how’s it going”, I sometimes respond with “Eh, it continues”, especially these days with the way that admissions have been going for me. Continue here means more than just the persistence of existence, or passively carried forward by our unstoppable movement through time. Continuing can be active; the linkage between past you, present you, and future you, all held together by the glue that *is* you. And some days more than others, I find myself needing a bit of extra oomph to pull myself out of the past and into the present. 

I mentioned above that I sometimes have stayed awake until the wee hours of the morning, unable to sleep because of anxiety about my applications and where I’ll end up. The advice usually goes something like “stop stressing about things that are outside of your control; you’ve done all you could, just let it happen, and things will work out”. And despite knowing this advice and hearing it and even having told it to other people, I know more than ever that that advice is very hard to follow. That advice tells me to separate my emotions from myself. But those emotions are a *part* of myself.

I’ve started to find a bit of peace in my own worrying. Yes, it’s stressful, but of course it’s my future that I’m worrying about. It makes sense to be stressed. The existence of my “safety school” (which isn’t a school at all, but a job) definitely makes me feel better about it all; I know that no matter what, there will be options for me moving forward: jobs, research positions, taking time off, or more. There is more than one path into the future. 

---



When I read these blogs as a high school student, I really, really felt like these people just had it all figured out. That they could give the magic advice with the wisdom that comes from being older, of having been through MIT and so much more life.

I don’t really feel that. In many ways, I feel like a continuation of that self who existed in high school, someone who yes, did grow, but in stuttered, diagonal, ways, rather than the linear progress I always expected. I don’t feel like I’m in a position where I can truly offer you advice on how to make it all feel better, especially when I myself am experiencing many of the struggles that you are. If this post didn’t quite strike a chord with you, [here’s](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/a_few_words/) [a](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/over-is-the-wait/) [collection](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/my-rejection-resume/) [of](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/to_the_deferred/) [a](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/why/) [few](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/its-not-me-its-you/) [other](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/rejects_i_feel_your_pain/) [posts](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/feeling-many-feelings/) (among *many* others) that might strike a chord with you.



















Now, grad schools don’t have “set dates” where all decisions come out, like undergraduate admissions; they come out in waves, whenever they get done reading them all, and you might hear back anywhere from January to April.



This is a post for those of you who were just rejected from whatever colleges you applied to, including MIT: *I feel your pain*. It hurts to be told no. I hope these don’t feel like empty words. I’ve had nights where I just sat down and couldn’t bring myself to be productive because I was sad about how this app season has gone. Wondering what I could have done differently in undergrad to change what happened this year. Anxiety about what the future holds, where I’ll end up, and if I’ll have to give up (for now) on this idea of going to graduate school. Asking if this is some personal judgment of my self-worth.

This is also a post for those of you who were just waitlisted. I’ve received 3 waitlists from graduate schools that I applied to, and just 1 acceptance — but that offer doesn’t come with funding yet, and so is basically a waitlist too. Now, don’t get me wrong, I am *very* excited to still be on these waitlists (as you should also be, if you’re on a waitlist, because it means there’s still a chance). But being stuck in this limbo state comes with its own stress.

And this is also a post for those of you who are still waiting. Not just for waitlist decisions, of course; many colleges have yet to release their decisions, and so you might be spending a few weeks just waiting to hear about where you could be spending the next four years. The anxiety and stress of waiting eats up at you. I’ve wasted so many days refreshing websites to hear the latest news about what schools have released decisions. It’s hard.



-> think about how to orgainze this section. do i want to validate? do i want to say? do i want to frame things through my own lens of applying to grad schools and what i’m feeling

goal: i try to stay away frmthe platitudes that i’ve heard people say over again; it’s not that they aren’t wrong, in fact, i think that they’re very much right; it’s just that osmeitmes, those arne’t het words that you want to hear. 

-> maybe i frame it as the “when you get bad news, what runs through your mind? then what do you think later, when you’ve had time to process?”

The college application process represents (for most students) the first time that they have been *judged*. Sure, your 7th grade science fair project might have been judged by your teachers, or maybe you submitted your art to the local paper, but in the process of applying to college, it all feels more *weighty*. It feels like you, as an individual, as a *person*, are being scrutinized by admissions officers who’ve never even met you, judging your *being* through a handful of carefully-honed essays, a transcript of letters and class names, and more. 

Graduate apps for me represent a similar thing: a culmination of my classes and experience in UROPs, 

**anxiety** 

If I tried, I could write a whole blog post about the anxiety of admissions. The stress of waiting for decisions. The stress of not knowing where you’ll be next year. The stress of having to *make* decisions. It’s pretty awful, to be honest.



**regrets**

When a decision doesn’t go your way, I think it is very, very easy to fall into a hole of “what could I have done differently”. Maybe I should have taken class X instead of Y. Maybe I should have changed my essay topics. Maybe I should have done something different over the summer, or been more focused freshman year, or … The list goes on.



Judgement.



This post is titled “and so i continue”. The word *continue* derives from Latin; *con-* meaning “together” or “with”, and *tenere*, meaning “to hold” (the same root as “maintain” or “tender” or “tenet”). In response to “how’s it going”, I sometimes respond with “Eh, it continues”. Continue here means more than just the persistence of existence, or being carried forward by our unstoppable movement through time. It is about the linkage between past you, present you, and future you, all held together by the glue that *is* you. 

Being told “no” or “hold on” by anyone isn’t easy, for all of the reasons talked about above. 



In many ways, the graduate school application process is different than the college app proces. Instead of a Common App essay, you write a singular personal statement that articulates your background and research interests and (maybe) specific research projects you might want to do. You’re being judged pretty much on just your ability to become a good researcher, not on your “personness” or “spikiness” or whatever buzzwords they use for applications these days. My “safety” school isn’t a school with a >50% acceptance rate, because those don’t exist, but a job offer that I have (and a job offer that I’m still trying to consider vs. grad school). You must commit to a school by April 15 at noon; sometimes, you get notification of admittance morning. In general, applications aren’t released on pre-set days; they come at some unknown time between January and April (and often, one school might release their decisions in waves).



In some ways, the grad app process is like college applications. You get 3 letters of recommendation from professors you know. You spend college taking hard classes and doing [UROPs](https://mitadmissions.org/discover/the-mit-education/undergraduate-research/) to build experience and figure out what kind of research you’re interested in doing. You figure out where you want to apply based on what schools match your interests, and you fill out the same forms a bajillion times. And when things don’t go the way you want it, you can’t help but feel that you were *judged* and they *didn’t* choose you.

 