---
title: "decisions, made and not"
category:
  - life
tags: 
  - choices
---

I like to think that people are defined by two things — the values that they hold and the choices that they make. So, I figured that a half-decent way of introducing myself to the world is to share some decisions I've made over the past few weeks across all *sorts* of areas in my life, just to give you a sense of all of the different things that I've had to think about recently. In alphabetical order [^1]:  

* **Bed: Amazon.** I would ideally like a semi-comfortable place to sleep in my new apartment within a few days after moving in. IKEA lets you specify delivery on a specific day, but one of my friends told me a horror story about delivery (3 weeks to get a bed after the planned delivery date?) and so I decided against that. Wayfair says shipping will be "1-3 weeks" and I don't think I could deal with that amount of uncertainty about when I get a mattress. Amazon also doesn't seem ideal (there are *so* many reviews about people who have found mold on their Amazon beds, and sorting through real/fake reviews is difficult difficult lemon difficult) but it seems like the best option among all 3, especially because I can schedule delivery with my "Amazon Day". None of these options seem great, and worst comes to worst, I'll be stuck on an air mattress for a few weeks.

* **Classes: 14.04 (Microeconomic Theory), 14.THU (Economics Thesis), 18.112 (Complex Analysis), 18.404 (Theory of Computation), 8.225/STS.042 (Physics in the 20th Century).** I am a 14-2 (Mathematical Economics), which means that I am an *exceptionally* rare unicorn[^5] at MIT. The quick rationales for classes that were on my Firehose[^11] but *didn't* end up making it on my class schedule are:

  * 14.121 (Microeconomic Theory I): Grad-level microeconomics, perhaps a bit *too* rigorous for me this semester compared to 14.04. And too many hours that I don't have time for. I've also gotten advice that taking grad micro isn't the best idea, since I'll just have to retake a very similar class.
  * 14.661 (Labor Economics I): A different grad class that's about wages, human capital, job searching, and more. This field is really cool, but I just don't think I have time for it this semester. Honestly pretty bummed about this one, since I enjoyed a different class (14.19, Market Design) I took with one of the professors.
  * 6.036 (Introduction to mAcHiNe LeArNiNg): I keep hearing about this thing called ML but never have actually taken any time to figure out what it's supposed to be. Maybe it's good to learn at some point. But this semester is a bit too busy for me to do it now.[^9]
  * 3.091 / 5.111 (Chemistry): I am a bad example and am punting my Chemistry GIR[^7] to senior spring. This is bad procedure. It's just that many of the classes I want to take happen to be fall-only classes :( Better hope I pass it next spring, or I'm not graduating[^6]…
  * 8.05 (Quantum Physics II): I've always wanted to learn more about quantum and just spend time doing the math of it rather than just the "pop culture" things I see of "ooooo Schrödinger's cat" and "quAnTUm cOmPUtInG". I'll probably never have the motivation to self-study it ever on [OCW](https://ocw.mit.edu/index.htm), so maybe this is a thing I try to take *next* semester. (And probably on listener, TBH.)
  * 11.011 (The Art and Science of Negotiation): Everyone who takes this class recommends it to everyone they know — they even wrote an [MIT News](http://news.mit.edu/2017/class-negotiation-skills-1103) article about it.[^12] I've kept telling myself that I would take it next semester, but now it's senior year and I don't think I can make it fit. Another one bites the dust :(
  * All the random HASS[^3] classes in the world: This section is already going on long enough, but there are literally dozens of HASS classes in the course catalog that I wish I could be taking this semester that I will never get a chance to :(

* **Jobs: applying to grad school, but no idea to which yet.** With an econ degree, there are basically three things I can do with my life: academia, public sector, and private sector. I vaguely structured my summers so that I'd try out all 3 before I graduated, and I'm still left feeling very confused. There's all sorts of different things to consider — what brings me joy, what I want to focus on, work-life balance, what the work is like, money, etc. And I am scared about having to decide between these different options.

  I've gotten the sense that there's a limit on how much "real economics" you can do with just a bachelor, and no matter what industry you go into, having a Ph.D. is needed to make meaningful contributions. Research also seems interesting from the various UROPs I've done while on campus and my own independent research. But a Ph.D. is also very scary — 6 years of your life in school, very unstructured work that requires lots of self-direction, and it's very hard to tell whether these are things that I'd enjoy from the limited exposure that I have from undergrad. While I think that while going to school in the long-term is good, it's hard to know whether it's something I should do immediately after graduation or whether I should take a break; in essence, it's just hard to know whether a Ph.D. is actually *right* for me. 

  For now, I think I'm going to be applying this fall; we'll see where I get in and reevaluate my options at that point. Maybe I RA for a few years. Maybe I work. I guess time will tell.

* **Introduction post: you're reading it!** Finding the best way to say "hello" is hard. I'd thrown around a few ideas, from "never thought this would happen / akjdsnfksjdf i'm a blogger?!?!?!" to "the story of this summer" to "[screaming into the void about my senior year being not what i wanted]". I realized that my goal with this introduction post was to show as many different things about me as possible while also talking about things I think about a lot, and those two things led me right here to this blog post.

* **Lecture attendance / moving-in day: trying to go to most, but skipping the first day to move.** I'm a person that tends to go to most of my classes, mostly because I like being in a set schedule. I'm still planning on trying to do this even with my classes with asynchronous options, but there is one large exception to this: the first day of classes. I had a few options for when to move to Boston: the weekend before school started (8/30), the first day of classes (9/1), or the first weekend of the school year (9/5). The Massachusetts quarantine order made the first option infeasible. The 5th would let me move in on a weekend when there weren't any classes, but delaying my move-in meant that I wouldn't be around to help with furniture moving, clean up our apartment, and settle in earlier. So I'm taking the L and skipping 1 day of classes, which I think is small enough in the grand scheme of things. Most of them are recorded, so I'll be able to catch up fairly reasonably. 

* **My blogging style: still in the works.** I'm relatively new to blogging; I've been blogging semi-regularly this summer (after at least 3 previous failed attempts and one attempt in group blogging where I posted like, 3 times).[^13] 

  In terms of the way that I write, while I generally like the aesthetic of typing in all lowercase and very stream-of-conscious-y, sometimes that doesn't always feel right (like for most of this post). The current idea is that that tone is going to be more in my footnotes (and occasionally in the bodies of my blogs). In terms of content, I don't really know what I'll talk about yet. Maybe it's things relating to doing a senior year online, maybe it's long reflections about the things at MIT that bring me joy, maybe it's appreciation for the small things at MIT, maybe it's worrying about decisions for the next big stage of life, who knows. For both content and tone, it's definitely something that's going to evolve, so we'll see how it goes.[^4]

* **Photo for the blogs: see above!** This was *definitely* the single most important recent choice for me: What photo do I send to admissions to get drawn for me? I have a slight problem where none of the photos that I am in look good. Part of it is that I am unphotogenic. Part of it is that I make the stupidest poses in every photo I am in. Options available to me included… 

  * face smack
  * other ones i sent

  The winner ended up being a photo that was taken when I lived in a literal glass box on MIT's campus for 96 hours. But that's a story for another time.

* **Returning: off-campus in Central Square.** I'd signed a lease with some friends back in January, back when I could still give hugs to my friends and COVID was just something very far-away. The end of last semester was hard for me class-wise; it's just so much easier to be  productive when you are surrounded by other people who are also drinking from the firehose. When MIT's opening plan released in July[^8], I had the option of either honoring my lease and living with my friends or returning to campus, where I could have access to libraries/gyms, but all classes that could be online would be online. Econ majors are effectively the lowest priority on the "get to return" scale, and so even if I were on campus, I'd have exactly 0 classes to take in-person. So I kept my lease, turned down MIT housing; and because of MIT safety policies, I guess that means that I've taken my last in-person class at MIT. Maybe even taken my last step inside MIT before I graduate. 

* **Science bowl: an invitational!** I loved science bowl so much in high school; my 8th-grade teacher introduced me to it, and then I started a team at my high school in my junior year. Through an incredible series of coincidences (involving uniquely colored t-shirts, living on the same floor, and being an over-eager frosh) I've ended up as the coordinator of [MIT Science Bowl](https://www.mitsciencebowl.com/). We run the Northeast Regional Middle School Science Bowl, and last fall we ran our first Invitational competition. MIT isn't allowing in-person events through the end of this year, so we're figuring out how to adapt to an online format. Don't want to share too many details yet, in case they change, but we will be running an invitational this fall and I am *very* excited c:

* **Thesis: oh NO.** As mentioned above in my classes, I'm doing a thesis this year. For now. Doing a thesis sounds very hard — it's independent research that I have to develop into a single well-put-together paper. But real research and Ph.D. programs are basically doing exactly that many times over, so I figure that I should probably try dedicating a decent chunk of my time to research. I've got a few ideas, from thinking about how ESP assigns students into classes, the idea of competition between schools (which I wrote about in a paper for a different class, 14.33), and a few other half-formed thoughts that aren't fully fleshed-out yet. I still have absolutely no clue what I'll be doing, so we'll see how it goes. 

That was a lot of words, and I still feel like there are still parts of me that you aren't getting. Sure, there's the other half of what I say makes up a person — values. But I don't think I'd solve the issue by rattling off a list of values to you (and pretending that my values are just something that I innately know and *can* rattle off). Even if I do share all of that, I feel like it'd still be an incomplete introduction to *me*. So what's missing?

During my sophomore spring, I spent many lunches getting to know a good friend of mine, Janice Y. '22. We'd grab food together about once a week in Maseeh[^10] and talk about all sorts of things, from what was keeping us busy to the things that were important to us to problems in our life. One week, she said to me something along the lines of: "I'm telling you my problems in retrospect after they're already solved; you're not getting the parts of my decisions where I'm struggling with everything and still figuring it out". I feel the same way with the decisions that I'm writing about above. While I can give you some sense of all of the ways that these decisions are hard, showing you these choices in hindsight is not the same as if we did it by hanging out in my room while I lay down on my floor and ask you to help me figure out my problems. Talking to you about all the small things and big things in life.

I am scared that I'm going to default into showing the put-together parts of me on these blogs; naturally, sharing the worries and stressy and everything messy with thousands of strangers is not exactly easy. It's not much easier in person, either; I find myself constantly worrying about whether I'm posing and putting on a mask and not actually showing people who I really am. This last summer, I've grown increasingly worried about the idea that I'll head out into post-MIT life and people will only know the put-together parts — in essence, the "resume" version of me — and that the things that I feel define myself in the present will simply go away because I lose the ability to *be* the person I want to be.

"Authenticity" and "vulnerable" are words that get thrown around a lot — for those of you who are applying this year, I'm betting a decent chunk of you who have heard them many times over in the context of writing your essays. In the ultimate Senior Year 2: Electric Boogaloo, I'll be trying my best to be authentic too, because sharing my MIT experience would be incomplete without sometimes showing you the not-so-put-together parts of my existence at this college. The musings, the worries, the crises. Because looking at things in hindsight and only seeing the outcomes of decisions could never actually show you all of the life that happens in the in-between.

I fell in love with these blogs back when I was applying, and read through the blog archives religiously. I've applied to be a blogger as many times as I can count,[^14] and I lack the words to express the shock of waking up, seeing an email from Petey saying "YOU GOT THE GIG", and thinking that I was still asleep. I know I've only got one real year[^2] of saying words to y'all, so I really do hope that I can share with you a little slice of my experiences, my life, and my MIT. 

So, I guess this is hello, world c:

[^1]: i don't wanna order this by order of importance because you might just pay attention to the little things and get bored when you hit the big ones. or you might just scroll to the big decisions and [let the little things in life pass you by](https://youtu.be/YcqauC49Xmc?t=37). how would one even decide whether some decision is more or less importaant? ordering chronologically just feels too linear, and let me tell y'all my brain does not exactly work in straight lines. this post was drafted very non-linearly and so will the rest of my blog posts. for your amusement, this post's footnotes are in order of when they were typed.
[^2]: tbh, is this year even real? stay tuned for another episode of "what is going to go wrong next in 2020" have your bingo cards ready everyone. y'all i just wish that we had a normal year and i could end mit like i expected :(
[^3]: humanities, arts, and social sciences
[^4]: confession: i was trying to think of a blogging schtick and my intial thought was "i want to rickroll the blogs. i'll start my first blog title with 'never'. and then 'gonna'. and then…" as you can tell by the title of this post, this is no longer the case. i got *really* stuck on what "gonna" was gonna be; depending on how far i got, "desert" is also pretty tough. this is my personal challenge to future bloggers to find *some* way to rickroll everyone that is more involved than a well placed link. or maybe just meme in general. post made entirely of memes when?
[^5]: per the [registrar](https://registrar.mit.edu/statistics-reports/enrollment-statistics-year), the class of  2021 has 9 14-2 majors and 10 14-1 majors, out of ~1100 people in their senior year. i added the numbers for primary and secondary 14 majors, so the numbers aren't quite the numbers in that link. pretty sure i've interacted with / been in a class with every 14-1 and 14-2 in my year. 
[^6]: aaaAAAAaaAaAAAaaa when did i become a senior i remember being a wee frosh and finding everything so new and exciting and now i am an old and alkjdsnflkjsaf someone please i am [not ready to be old](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pdOIHNF2vJc)
[^7]: translation out of mit-ese: i am delaying the required chemistry class until the last possible moment. the [GIRs](https://registrar.mit.edu/registration-academics/academic-requirements/general-institute-requirements), which everyone must take, regardless of if you're a math major or a music major, consist of 1 semester of chemistry, 1 semseter of bio, 2 semesters of physics, and 2 semesters of calculus. they technically also include other requirements, but colloquially, people say "GIR" to refer to these classes.
[^8]: some useful context about mit's reopening plan: seniors can come back in the fall and freshman + sophomores + juniors can come back in the spring. all classes that can be online will be online. you cannot take in-person classes unless you are on-campus and abide by mit's guidelines of social distancing, twice-a-week testing, etc. it's definitely one of the most conservative plans for bringing students back to campus (i think only paralleled by harvard's "only freshman, no in-person classes at all")
[^9]: i also was taking this in part to fulfill a requirement for a Course 6 (cs) minor. I'm a firm believer in taking classes and just letting the minors pop out so whoops. looks like no course 6 minor for me.
[^10]: the ONLY dorm at mit that serves lunch. conveniently is close to campus. not-so-conveniently has worse food than next house, my dorm! or at least, my dorm until this year… 
[^11]: [firehose.guide](), a tool developed by a student in their spare time to help people plan out their schedules
[^12]: "an MIT" looks weird to me. i know it's grammatically correct but it's been 4 years and this still just looks so wrong to me. i do not dispute the grammar i am just complaining about the looks tm↩
[^13]: both numbers in this sentence are 3; blog readers it is important for you to all know that i can only count to 3. i am aware of the existence of numbers beyond 3 but their ordering is a mystery that i will never know. this is also why the footnotes are out of order. there are many phrases that i repeatedly tell other people; "i cannot count past 3" is one of them. you could replace me with a soundboard and it would take a very long time before people notice. 
[^14]: see previous footnote
[^15]: from the ESP wiki: "ESPro. 1) A knowledgable older admin who helps directors get started directing a program. 2) An old, and usually grumpy, ESPerson." i would like to think that i'm not *that* grumpy (yet).