---
title: "on time"
---

The start of this blog post is happening at 1:42AM.[^1]  I fell asleep at around 9:30PM after a very exhausting day. But my sleep schedule has somehow gotten messed up over the past few days. It started with waking up absurdly early, like 7AM; now it's some weird hybrid where I am just awake for a few hours in the middle of the night. I have no idea why this is happening, and I really, really wish that I was just asleep right now, but I've been trying for over an hour and my body is just not letting me. So I figured I would just start writing. 

There's some [evidence](https://www.sciencealert.com/humans-used-to-sleep-in-two-shifts-maybe-we-should-again)[^2] from various disciplines that this isn't absurdly weird, but this does not help my tiredness in the moment. The evidence generally points to a historical precedent for a biphasic sleep cycle, with people doing work in the few-hour period that they're awake in between their two sleeps. So here I am, pecking away at my keyboard in an attempt to take my mind off of the fact that I cannot sleep.

The initial version of the previous sentence read "pecking away at my keyboard in an attempt to be productive with this time that I'm awake". And I guess that's where we'll start my musings about time.

## productiveness

* there exists an idea of time being "wasted"
* an aobservation that i had my sophomore year htat i've talked about with a lot of poeple – imt sometimes you feel bad for doing things just for oyur own sake because they're not directly productive. mit is not competitive int he sense of people striving to best one another, it's this feeling of seeing so many amazing and incredile and compettent people arond you and wanting to be able to be the same
* there are things in my life that i know are valuable to me — being social, talkig to people, working out, meditating, going on walks, yet i can never actually bring myself to do them. is it becuae it is hard to determine productivity int he moment, in favor of other things that are work?
  * the word procrastination is used a lot for this in the context of just work, but i want it to mean about more than that
* 70 hour work weeks at bridgewater. and then academia. find numbers for how much worked. and this makes me very worried about what my life is going to be. i mentioned back in my very first blog post that i am worried

## meaning

* start with 525,600 minutes lyrics
* what makes our time valuable? the commodity that we are all constrainde by on an indiivudal level. 16 hours of sleep (if you sleep reasonably), something something waitbutwhy calendar of all of hte days you'll be alive (and maybe hte xkcd comic about lifetime advent calendar )
* economists do something cool where they measure the "time value of money" – see that study from gruber's book where #25 an hour was time spnet waiting for gas as well as median income. but while i am an economist (let's be real i am *not*), i am a person first and an economist second. and i don't want to go around life computing the expect value of every single action i ever take and using that to decide what i do with my life.
* differences between "conventional" productive and "life" productive
* so what are hte things that i find meaningful with my time? (note:  might just feel like a "what are things that i find meaningful". think about this)
  * idea: when we're tlking about the idea of time having meaning to us, what we're really tlaking about is the value of life; 
  * one of the 5 love languages is quality time
* i want to end this section with my favorite twighlightepisode of all time (the original rod sterling version). (episode about a man who finds all the time in the world but then breaks glsases). 
* one quesiton that i like to ask people is that if your money needs were completely taken care off, what would you be doing with your life?

## regrets

* earlier i mentioned the idea of time being "wasted"
* some friends i have do not have regrets. they say that they made hte best decision that they could in the moment, and so there isn't a use in regretting becaue you couldn't have done something better at the time.
* i think this is a good core idea, but there's one interpretation where it doesn't quite hold its water – it relies on the diea that there exist best choices. and i've written on my own blog about ideas of why this doesn't always happen.
  * there are choices where it is impossible to tell what the best choice – choosing colleges? am i going to be a perosn that juts continually references hte application process i think i don't want to be that
  * of cours,e while this idea of not having regrets is good, i am bad at doing things that i think are good (see productiveness section)
* what are some things htat i regret with my time
  * classes at mit — exploring more, taking other cool ones
  * not prioritiizng people enough my freshman year. came into college so excited, then wakeup call from hayley 
  * summer in dc and not "making hte most of it" and there is that phrase 
  * thinking about all of the things tha thtis last year of mit could have been that no longer can be

## passage

* first week of mit felt much longer than jump from sep to oct, and then semesters flying by
* even more apparent when you are in quarantine and every day felt hte same; 6 months happened so fast, yet each day was long
* idea that this passage happens becuase new experiences make more meories and we eremembe rmore – same with each year getting older, birthdays have less signfiicance and the y happen quicker
* "let life pass you by" – jim croce
* will i have things to blog abotu this year

## 10,000 hours

huors – 10 hours ofdoing things by libby

10000 hours to be an expert

25-50 pesonal rule

this probably fits into a different section

---

The first footnote below says I started this blog in August; this sentence is also being written that same night, now 2:38AM. In that hour, I've written out a vague outline for this entire blog post; whenever I open it back up again, we'll see if the thoughts behind it are any decent. I'm not as tired as I was when I started writing this, which I think is a bad thing; two days ago, I woke up at 1AM and didn't get back to sleep until 5AM. I wish my body could remember the joys of continuous sleep again. I wish I could just hang out with people without worrying about masks and distancing and risk. I wish I had a senior year that wasn't like this.

But these are times that 

[^1]: This is one of those blog posts that gets started probably months before you see it; this footnote is being written sometime in August. 
[^2]: This article has references to very few scientific studies; I maybe should look into whether there's good articles on this subject now. If you happen to know any, let me know… 


