### screened (non-lottery) scores

let’s now say that everyone is admitted using the same non-lottery score $v$. (we’ll again say that there aren’t priority groups, for ease). for example, $v$ could be an audition result, test score, or GPA.

all of the logic that we built up in the previous sections suddenly doesn’t work. why? suppose that there’s one school $s$ with a cutoff $c_s = 0.7$. by the logic above, we would say that each student has a probability $p = 0.7$ of being assigned to $s$. but that doesn’t seem to be correct; some student $i$ with $r_i =0.01$ is an incredibly qualified candidate, and isn’t really that comparable to a student $j$ with  $r_j = 0.99$. student $i$ probably has a history of high test scores, whereas student $j$ may simply not be ready for the program. there’s no reason to think that they have similar chances of being admitted, as their baseline characteristics are likely very different.

so what can we do instead? let’s instead consider students with scores pretty close to 0.7 — to be technical, we’ll consider students with $r \in [0.7 - \delta,  0.7 + \delta]$ for some small number $\delta$ (like 0.01). in some sense, these students are pretty comparable to each other; it might be the difference between someone scoring 69 on a test and scoring 71 on a test. furthermore, for students within this range, they probably have really similar probabilities of being assigned to $s$. a number of factors could lead to small changes in their score — bad sleep the night before, their pencil eraser broke, the audition went better than it had any right to be.

so let’s say that for students with $r \in [0.7 - \delta,  0.7 + \delta]$, they each have $p_s = 0.5$. 

* we’ve assumed that the cutoffs for screened schools are distinct and never overlap. this isn’t the case in reality. it’s mostly ok, but you can run into some scenarios where two schools using the same score have cutoffs that are quite close to each other, and this can lead to the sum of p-scores being greater than 1. [EXAMPLE]
* 